---
layout: post
title:  "Year 2"
date:   2020-06-07 22:35:39 +0100 
---


### Kicking up the pace

The fall semester of the second year at the Computer Science programme was quite intense, with several deadlines every week.
I enjoyed almost all of the courses though. Programming paradigms was a bit of a grab-bag, covering logic programming in Prolog, functional programming in Haskell, and some introduction to automata theory. I think it was a good way of broadening our perspectives, and I remember being impressed that our Haskell programs generally worked correctly right away, once we'd finally gotten them to actually compile. I don't know how much I actually retained from the course, I remember almost failing the theoretical exams.

In spite of the course load, I spent a decent amount of procrastination time taking a couple of Coursera courses during the semester. I started far more courses than I actually finished. Looking back at it now it seems I actually finished:
* Model Thinking - Which I'd like to go through again with a bit more time.
* Internet History, Technology, and Security - Which was a good primer on some internet basics, and gave me a richer understanding of the work done at Bletchly Park.
* Automata - I'm almost certain I managed to get through this by being good at multiple choice questions rather than a deep understanding of the material.
* Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy - Most of it went over my head, but it helped give me some foundations for the Logic course.

I also attempted to do a couple of different Algorithm courses, but did not really have the bandwidth. I do remember being introduced to Union-Find and Kruskal's Algoritm though, that was quite neat!


The other actual university courses this semester included Logic for Computer Science, which was probably my favourite course that could be classified as mathematics. I spent way too much time writing out my homework assignments in LaTeX, but since I was introduced to LaTeX I've always found a weird pleasure in using it to create documents. Especially when ShareLatex/Overleaf takes away the headache of installing packages.

There was a Computer Architecture class that was a really well-organised step-by-step walkthrough from logic gates, to transistors, to ALUs, to processors, and caches. The professor running the course had a habit of memorising everyone's name, an impressive feat given that the course was taken by 200+ people every year. He also had an extremely intense way of drilling into any hesitation or weakness when you were presenting your work. The key was really to be extremely prepared, listen carefully to the questions, and be very confident in your answers. The preparatory material was always quite extensive, and they would rarely, if ever, try to trip you up by going outside the material. 

It lead to situations where people would sit around and wait to present their assignments until they saw he was busy talking to another pair of students. I'm conflicted about his style, on the one hand I don't think I'll ever forget how block size affects cache lines, but on the other hand I feel like examination doesn't have to be adverserial. Actually, scratch the conflict, I just remembered that people were reduced to tears on multiple occasions. I definitely don't think that should be necessary.


There was also a course in Numerical Methods, which I don't have particularly fond memories of. My biggest gripe was the final laboratory exercise, which made up the bulk of the grade on the course. There were 20 or so different assignments to choose between, that ranged from trivial to completely broken in difficulty. Genuinely, there was at least one assignment that was just full of incorrect instructions, meaning that it could not be completed as specified. My lab partner and I ended up with a middle of the road project, but neither of us were particularly adept at the theory or using MATLAB.

The only reason I really got through it all was thanks to collaborating with a lot of excellent people. I really started building friendships through all the shared adversity that semester. If any of you are reading this, thanks! It was great, let's not do that again!


### Slightly Slower Spring

After a very intense autumn, I remember the spring being much less intense academically, but still stressful in a lot of other ways.

I don't know if I actually learned very much from the Database course. I still feel slightly uncomfortable when I need to do anything slightly complex using SQL. I somehow got a decent grade, but I think that was just the result of an easy exam. Definitely something I've been able to slightly amend after I started working, but it's something I could do with putting more time into.

The Probability and Statistics course was pretty good, though the lecturer spent a lot of time whining that we couldn't appreciate anything due our the lack of Multivariate Calculus. 

We had a big group project Software Engineering course which I have fond memories of. Each team was working in collaboration with a local company on a project they'd specified. We ended up working with a medical research group on a prototype for localising individuals and equipment in a hospital setting, using smartphones and Bluetooth beacons. In hindsight it's almost prophetic. The size of the group meant that splitting up labour evenly was difficult, but I got a chance to write some Android code. The majority of the graded coursework consisted of requirement/architecture documents. We wrote more technical documents in two months than I've written in two years as a professional, most of them extremely bloated, according to slightly arcane specifications.

I also failed my first (and only) exam, in "Organisation and Knowledge-Intensive Work". I took the exam a second time after the summer without having done any additional studying and got a grade that was at the 80th percentile, go figure. My main memory of the course was when we had to take an MBTI-like test and write a reflection. The lecturer was less than impressed with the number of postivists in our cohort who dismissed it as little more than horoscopes. It wasn't all bad though, I do appreciate having a handle on theories like "Forming, Storming, Norming, Performing" even if it's just to understand what project/product managers mean when they reference it. There was also a really neat exercise in illustrating ineffecient communication structures.


### Engagement

I also got inspired by one of my friends to start getting more involved as a student representative. It got me a lot of insight into how things work at universities, and I'd like to think that we helped drive some improvements. I also managed to get myself involved in a conflict between central university administration and the Computer Science school, around centralising the IT support department. 

It was an extremely stressful period, with lots and lots of interpersonal drama, and strong feelings on all sides. It also gave me a taste of the darker side of academia. Turns out, when people work in the same place for decades, there's plently of times for grudges to fester. Some very popular faculty spoke out very strongly, and a lot of the student body rallied behind them. 

In the end, I think the experience was more educational than damaging. Though there was a period where I couldn't stop checking my phone for messages, but also felt sick every time I looked at my phone. I think I got better at compartmentalising in later situations in life outside of university. I also got a lot of facetime with faculty, particularly people outside the departments I spent most of my time in. 

I do hold a special place in my heart for the consensus driven committee of "well-respected individuals" who all took their duties very seriously, even if our function was largely ceremonial. I hadn't thought about it much, but it's actually surprisingly similar to the employee representatives we had during the consulting process when we got acquired. 

This whole period could probably do with its own post to be honest. Maybe another day.