---
layout: post
title:  "On Cults, or Cultish Traits of Organisations"
date:   2020-06-09 13:17:40 +0100 
---


I feel like many (most?) of the organisations I've been part of, professional or otherwise, have lots of cultish elements.
As a very secular person, I'm always fascinated how we adopt rituals and traditions, especially in corporate settings.
There's a cynical part of me that feels that it's a way for the corporation to create a stronger sense of loyalty to optimise value extraction from its employees.

And while I do think that's broadly speaking true, I don't think that's all it is.
It does help create a sense of community and does make the work feel more... Meaningful? Worthwhile? I don't really know what the right word is, but, it does improve my lived experience of work. And if I'm going to spend ~20% of my week doing something (~35% if we discount sleep), I feel like improving that is important and valuable.

### Pivotal

> Do What Works
> Do The Right Thing
> Always Be Kind

I do think our (former?) mottos are well-chosen, partially because they are open to interpretation, without going so far as to be meaningless.

Particularly as a framing device that sets a tone for the work that we do, and as a reinforcing mechanism that gets applied liberally to course correct when we are straying of the path.

I got reminded of the importance of being careful/aware/conscious of how we apply them.
A former Pivot mentioned how "Always be kind" was used to put the burden on them to deal with a person who was treating them badly.
There were some additional comments around how Pivotal is a bit of an echo chamber, and how many of us are conflict avoidant to a fault, something that hit fairly close to home. Something to keep in mind for the future, to be more aware of why the conflict is happening, and why the other party may not have the luxury of being able to avoid it.