---
layout: post
title:  "Year 5"
date:   2020-06-24 22:12:20 +0100 
---

Mandatory disclaimer that these posts are clearly far from daily at this point. Stuff happens.

### Year 5

I think the fifth year was probably my favourite in terms of academics. In large part part this was probably thanks to being back in my comfort zone. I also had the benefit of not having to worry about grades, and just feeling like I knew what I was doing at this point.

It was still a hard year, for personal reasons. But, I'm going to focus this post on the uni-side of things.

### Autumn

Because I'd gone abroad, I'd not taken a handful of mandatory courses in my Master's programme. So my autumn was mostly filled up by those.

The Internet Protocols and Principles was a really good course. The lecturers tended to focus on trade-offs and abstractions, and made you think about why certain protocols were designed in particular ways. I still feel slightly intimidated by networking sometimes, particularly in interviews, but I feel like I at least have a solid foundation to build from.

I really decided to do the absolute minimum to pass Advanced Algorithms. Which I stand by as probably one of the best decisions I've made. It's not that the material was uninteresting, but I just did not have the motivation, and it left me with so much more time and energy.

The course on Philosopy and Methodology of Science was pretty good. Lots of small exercises, which meant a low but consistent workload. I definitely think it's valuable to cover things like falsification.

I don't have particularly strong feelings either way for the Artifical Intelligence course. I think it was fine. The practical programming assignments I remember being quite fun, though I also remember getting stuck on pretty dumb mistakes for significant periods of time. Though I guess it was a good learning experience.

The only elective course I took was Patterns for Large-Scale Software Development, in spite of the strange name, it was really good. Given by a very passionate Maths professor and professional software engineer. The whole project focused on building out a Hearthstone clone, with rapidly changing requirements every week. I really enjoyed working on it, and getting to learn some Clojure was great! Once we got over the initial hurdle.

### Spring

The Software Reliability course is the reason I get slightly twitchy anytime someone mentions test coverage without any qualifiers. Do you mean statement coverage? Branch coverage? MC/DC?
The lecturer had a very sardonic British sense of humour. The content was fine, but the course could have used a bit more depth. Things like mutation testing would have fit in really well.
At least at the time it was a very straight-forward and easy course, which can be useful.

Especially when you have courses like Parallel and Distributed Computing. To be fair to the lecturer, Mads Dam, he did survey people, and we were spending about the time that you'd expect for the credits. But he did agree to lower the workload slightly after the first few weeks. With that said, in terms of content, this was probably my favourite course. I'm a sucker for concurrency problems. I definitely don't think I'm particularly good at solving them, but I'd argue that that's at least partially because they're hard. I remember being extremely stressed out by the prospect of an oral exam, but it actually worked out okay. Make sure to go through your exercise notes beforehand!

I also got reunited with Cyrille Artho and Java PathFinder, thanks to the Software Security course he taught together with Roberto Guanciale. Another one of my favourites. The content was a nice mix of practice and theory, and managed to cover a pretty nice range of verification & validation techniques.

I also repeated my bad habit of signing up for something and failing to commit. Mads tipped me off to a PhD-level course on Theorem Proving being taught by a new Post Doc, and I thought it'd be interesting. I didn't even finish the first assignment. For a bit I thought I'd just audit the lectures. Mads pushed me and stated pretty clearly that if I wanted to understand the material I should do the exercises. I mumbled something about him being right, and generally just made a fool out of myself. And then I dropped the course. Which I think was fine and the right decision. I just wish I'd had more of a spine. As I'm writing this, I'm remembering what else was going on at the time, and I think I might be too harsh on my past self in this instance. Oh well, where was I?

The final course, and oh what a course it was.

### Studs - The Study Trip

The Computer Science Student Chapter has a yearly project in which a group of 30 or so Computer Science students organise events at various tech companies. These events are basically a very high-touch recruitment/marketing opportunity for the companies, and they pay accordingly. 
The money then goes to fund a trip abroad for the students, where they meet other companies and just generally have an incredible experience.

Somehow, a past Computer Science & Engineering cohort managed to convince the university that this project should give course credits. So it's also a 15 ECTS credit course. 
It should be noted that the project is a significant amount of work, including sales, event organising, accounting, travel planning, and report writing. But shared with a large group of people it's very manageable.

And the whole thing seems to be very mutually beneficial. Hiring engineering talent is hard. And the companies get the chance to engage with the students when they're just about to graduate (and are comparatively cheap). So the price tag for the events for each individual company is actually fairly reasonable.

It should be said that the cohort that did this project back right before the Internet Bubble popped were able to go not just to the States, but also to Bali and Japan. They had more money than they could spend. And then they came back to a market that had imploded and no-one was able to get a job. So if you're looking for a barometer for the tech industry, you might want to keep an eye on the KTH Study Trip.



